OSDOCS-20040: Adds PlanPolicy to RHCL (#112905)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/proc-configuring-authentication-planpolicy.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *deployment/rhcl-PlanPolicy.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-configuring-authentication-planpolicy_{context}"]
= Configuring authentication for plan-based rate limiting

[role="_abstract"]
You can configure API key authentication on a Gateway by deploying an AuthPolicy and creating per-plan API key secrets, so that {prodname} can identify which rate-limiting plan applies to each request.

> == Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Prerequisites
```

> * {prodname} is installed in your OpenShift cluster. For more information, see the {prodname} installation documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You installed {prodname}. 
```

> * The OpenShift CLI (`oc`) is installed and you are logged in to your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You installed {oc-first}.
* You are logged in to your cluster with a `cluster-admin` role.
```

> * A Gateway resource named `${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}` exists in the `${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}` namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You created the `Gateway`, `AuthPolicy`, and route objects for your deployment.
* You configured API key-based authentication.
```
ask if planpolicy works with OIDC or any other auth method--or just API key?

Reviewer: if it only works with API key based auth, place an important note in the opening concept module

> * The following environment variables are set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
rip out all of the install and deployment steps and list only basic prereqs; stick to planpolicy only

+

> [source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> $ export KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS=api-gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> $ export KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME=external

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> == Deploying an AuthPolicy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating an AuthPolicy with API key authentication
```
separate module

> . Deploy an AuthPolicy that targets the Gateway and enables API key authentication:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Deploy an AuthPolicy that targets the Gateway and enables API key authentication by using the following example:
```

+

> [source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
```
all CRs and CRDs are YAMLs

----

> $ oc apply -f - <<EOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
make a separate step to apply the policy (see existing default authpolicy module in the deployment assembly)

apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: AuthPolicy
metadata:

>   name: toystore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  name: _<sample_app>_
```
let's avoid this toystore app as much as possible

  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
  rules:
    authentication:
      "api-key-plan":
        apiKey:
          selector:
            matchLabels:

>               app: toystore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              app: _<sample_app>_
```

          allNamespaces: true
        credentials:
          authorizationHeader:
            prefix: APIKEY

> EOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----
+

> The `selector.matchLabels` field instructs Authorino to look up API key secrets that carry the `app: toystore` label. Setting `allNamespaces: true` allows secrets from any namespace to be matched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `spec.rules.rules.authentication."api-key-plan".apiKey.selector.matchLabels.app:` field value points to the API key `Secrets` objects that carry the `app: _<sample_app>_` label.
* Setting `spec.rules.rules.authentication."api-key-plan".apiKey.selector.allNamespaces: true` allows secrets from any namespace to be matched.
```
i don't think we need to get into the weeds of which component operator does what here, it's just confusing

Reviewer: remember to use the whole field reference even when its long as heckfire

> . Create API key secrets for each plan tier. Each secret must carry the `authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino` label so that Authorino discovers it, and a `secret.kuadrant.io/plan-id` annotation that identifies the plan tier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create API key `Secret `objects for each plan tier that you want to use. Each `Secret` must carry the `authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino` label and a `secret.kuadrant.io/plan-id` annotation that identifies the plan tier as shown in the following example:
```

> +

Reviewer: .Example `Secret` objects for plan tiers

> [source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
```

----

> $ oc apply -f - <<EOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
separate the yaml from the command to apply it (same pattern)

apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: gold-key
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
  labels:
    authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino

>     app: toystore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    app: _<sample_app>_
```

  annotations:
    secret.kuadrant.io/plan-id: gold
stringData:

>   api_key: _<gold-api-key-value>_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  api_key: _<gold_api_key_value>_
```
underscores for all user-replaced values (supplementary style guide)

type: Opaque
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: silver-key
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
  labels:
    authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino

>     app: toystore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    app: _<sample_app>_```

  annotations:
    secret.kuadrant.io/plan-id: silver
stringData:

>   api_key: _<silver-api-key-value>_

Reviewer: underscores

type: Opaque
---
    authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino

>     app: toystore

Reviewer: sample app

  annotations:
    secret.kuadrant.io/plan-id: bronze
stringData:

>   api_key: _<bronze-api-key-value>_

Reviewer: underscores

type: Opaque

> EOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ * Replace `_<sample_app>_ ` with the name of your application.
```

> Replace `_<gold-api-key-value>_`, `_<silver-api-key-value>_`, and `_<bronze-api-key-value>_` with the actual API key strings you want to assign to each tier.

Reviewer: underscores

> == Verification

Reviewer: this is long enough that a separate module is needed; as a best-practice, if the verification is more than a single step, it can be new procedure module

> . Confirm that the AuthPolicy was accepted by checking its status:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Confirm that the `AuthPolicy` custom resource (CR) was accepted by checking its status by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc get authpolicy toystore -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions}'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc get authpolicy _<sample_app>_ -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions}'
```

----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
Replace `_<sample_app>_` with the name of your application.
```

> The output should include a condition with `"type":"Accepted"` and `"status":"True"`.

Reviewer: i think we have example outputs for this case in the docs already that you can just copy in

> . Confirm that all three API key secrets are present in the gateway namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Confirm that all three API key secrets are present in the gateway namespace by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc get secrets -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -l app=toystore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc get secrets -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -l app=_<sample_app>_
```
+
Replace ...etc, you know what to do here

----
+
.Expected output
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
NAME         TYPE     DATA   AGE

> bronze-key   Opaque   1      _<age>_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bronze-key   Opaque   1      2 mins
```
or whatever the unit is, let's ask QE or dev for an output; these are not a user-replaceable values, they just show the how long the CR has been active

gold-key     Opaque   1      _<age>_
silver-key   Opaque   1      _<age>_
----
 

> . Send a request without an API key and confirm that it is rejected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Send a request without an API key and confirm that it is rejected by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ curl -H 'Host: _<your-api-hostname>_' http://_<gateway-hostname>_/toy -i

Reviewer: hmm this will need an update; we need to know the Gateway fields where these values are

----
+
.Expected output
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
----
 

> . Send a request with a valid API key and confirm that it succeeds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Send a request with a valid API key and confirm that it succeeds by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ curl -H 'Host: _<your-api-hostname>_' \

Reviewer: same here
